h1. Authentication and Authorization with ToxOtis

h2. 1. Introduction

h3. 1.1. About Sigle sign-on

In <a href="http://opentox.org">OpenTox</a>, access is controlled by an <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_sign-on">SSO</a> server (based on Sun's <a href="">openSSO</a>). Single Sign-on can control access to systems based on any distributed architecture. Different services address to an SSO server to authenticate a client and ask permission for a given request. More on Single sign-on can be found at <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_sign-on">wikipedia</a>. 

h3. 1.2. OpenTox A&A API

The OpenTox A&A API is documented at <a href="http://opentox.org/dev/apis/api-1.1/AA">http://opentox.org/dev/apis/api-1.1/AA</a>. If you don't have an account on OpenTox, you should head over to the <a href="http://opentox.org/join_form?came_from=http%3A//opentox.org/dev/apis/api-1.1/AA">registration form</a>.


h2. 2. ToxOtis Authentication and Authorization

h3. 2.1. Acquire an Authentication Token

Once you provide your credentials to the SSO server, you acquire an authentication token. This will be used to authenticate yourself against any web service in OpenTox (if needed) and get permission to perform an operation. This is easily accomplished in ToxOtis. You simply provide your credentials to the <a href="http://github.com/alphaville/ToxOtis/blob/master/src/org/opentox/toxotis/util/aa/AuthenticationToken.java"></a>AuthenticationToken</a> "(code)":http://github.com/alphaville/ToxOtis/blob/master/src/org/opentox/toxotis/util/aa/AuthenticationToken.java "(doc)":http://opentox.ntua.gr/toxotis/javadoc/org/opentox/toxotis/util/aa/AuthenticationToken.html : 

<pre>
AuthenticationToken at = new AuthenticationToken("JohnSmith","mysecretPass111");
</pre>

If you have a password file (read next section), you can use it to acquire an authentication token:

<pre>
File passwordFile = new File("/path/to/my_sercret.key");
AuthenticationToken at = new AuthenticationToken(passwordFile);
</pre>

For security reasons, every token has a certain lifetime after which is invalid, so even if someone malvolently obtains your token, will not have access to any OpenTox web service after a certain time. For the same reason, it is considered good practise to invalidate your tokens (i.e. log out) in case you do not intend to use them any more. It is advisable that you "add a shutdown hook":http://download.oracle.com/javase/1.4.2/docs/api/java/lang/Runtime.html#addShutdownHook%28java.lang.Thread%29 in your application which will invalidate all tokens before exiting the application. According to the OpenTox specifications, it is up to the client to monitor and manage tokens according to their life time. A collection of methods is available in <code>AuthenticationToken</code> that return the creation timestamp of the token as well as its status. A token is characterized as <code>ACTIVE</code>, <code>INACTIVE</code> or <code>DEAD</code>. A token should be used only if it is ACTIVE. A token is INACTIVE if it has either expired or it has been invalidated and DEAD if it has not yet been initialized (the user was not authenticated). So output of the follwing code:

<pre>
AuthenticationToken token = new AuthenticationToken("JohnSmith","mysecretPass111");
TokenStatus statusBefore = token.getStatus();
token.invalidate();
TokenStatus statusAfter = token.getStatus();
System.out.println(statusBefore + ", " +  statusAfter);
</pre>

will be:

<pre>
ACTIVE, INACTIVE
</pre>

h3. 2.2. Advanced Security Issues

In general, it is not good practise to store unencrypted passwords in your program or in your database. However, if you need to have your username and password stored so that you can easily use them, ToxOtis offers an encryption utility: <a href="http://github.com/alphaville/ToxOtis/blob/master/src/org/opentox/toxotis/util/aa/PasswordFileManager.java">PasswordFileManager</a> "(doc)":http://opentox.ntua.gr/toxotis/javadoc/org/opentox/toxotis/util/aa/PasswordFileManager.html. First of all, you have to create a (private) master key and store it in a file. You should make this file hidden and modify its permissions so that only your application will have access to it. The file should look like this:

<pre>
--- START MASTER KEY ---
fEFWQ1FRUVdSXXxhOVBnazQyKy8vUzRcPWFfM2tmKjE
ajoTmn7ieV1qfb3645fFqa2MowkmMmP3Xg0A1gCRjTp
D96r3MEhKC89EAfpNG3hIKVxi4JBtyBxWySJIiidJX3
De6mx2tYqTJgyC8g83141qf27p59z5P51lw7VQ8E55n
wFr3T53y4WMW1nW5CN77C6oP832C2EtjUwR381ms6T3
P96y1NGm7I78k3sb4efDT462xVVUA8OU461u22T2v78
x3Mt6591855xKP65vQWn730jY889w47h9Fm0h6zYS04
--- END MASTER KEY ---
</pre>

You should use the password generator of ToxOtis to create a good and <em>valid</em> master key. Here is an example of using <a href="http://github.com/alphaville/ToxOtis/blob/master/src/org/opentox/toxotis/util/aa/PasswordFileManager.java">PasswordFileManager</a> "(doc)":http://opentox.ntua.gr/toxotis/javadoc/org/opentox/toxotis/util/aa/PasswordFileManager.html for this purpose:

<pre>
Thread createPasswordFile = new Thread() {
	@Override
	public void run() {
		try {
			PasswordFileManager.CRYPTO.
				createMasterPasswordFile("/dev/random", "/home/user/toxotisKeys/master.key", 500);
		} catch (IOException ex) {
			// Handle the exception properly!
		}
	}
};
Executors.newFixedThreadPool(1).submit(createPasswordFile);
</pre>

Here is the output of this method:

<pre>
----- ToxOtis Pasword Generator -----
Random number generator : /dev/random
Password file           : /home/chung/toxotisKeys/master.key
Password Stength        : EXCELENT
</pre>

The class <code>PasswordFileManager</code> "(doc)":http://opentox.ntua.gr/toxotis/javadoc/org/opentox/toxotis/util/aa/PasswordFileManager.html is <code>Observable</code> "(code)":http://www.docjar.com/html/api/java/util/Observable.java.html "(doc)":http://download.oracle.com/javase/1.4.2/docs/api/java/util/Observable.html so you can monitor the progress of the password generation (That is why we wrap the execution of the master password file cretion in a Thread). This process might take long especially if you choose a good random number generator such as <code>/dev/random</code> on Linux. In case you do not provide a random number source (<code>null</code>), <code>java.security.SecureRandom</code> "(code)":http://www.docjar.com/html/api/java/security/SecureRandom.java.html "(doc)":http://download.oracle.com/javase/1.4.2/docs/api/java/security/SecureRandom.html will be used instead (This is an RNG implementation by Java). In that case the method will print:

<pre>
----- ToxOtis Pasword Generator -----
Random number generator : Secure RNG (java.security.SecureRandom)
Password file           : /home/chung/Desktop/alt.key
Password Stength        : EXCELECT (100)
</pre>

While running you can monitor the process of the key creation:

<pre>
while (true) {
	if (CRYPTO.hasChanged()) {
	    System.out.println(CRYPTO.getPasswordGenerationProgress());
	}
	if (CRYPTO.getPasswordGenerationProgress()==100){
	    break;
	}
}
</pre>

Suppose now that your username is <code>JohnSmith</code> and your password is <code>s3cret</code>. Then you can use the above master password file to create an <em>encrypted</em> file for your credentials:

<pre>
PasswordFileManager.CRYPTO.setMasterPasswordFile("/home/user/toxotisKeys/master.key");
PasswordFileManager.CRYPTO.createPasswordFile("JohnSmith", "s3cret", "/home/john/.hidpass/.my.key");
</pre>

This will create a file with your credentials at the specified destination, that is<code>/home/john/.hidpass/my.key</code> (We suggest that this file should be hidden). Your private key will look like the following:

<pre>
--- START PRIVATE KEY ---
/EXEudbuXSmvp2SrNI6iewwq==
2SSiPLZuCMLlz81=
--- END PRIVATE KEY ---
</pre>

Now you can delete the line above which contains your credentials and any line like that and use the generated encrypted file to authenticate your self. Here is an example:

<pre>
File passwordFile = new File("/home/john/.hidpass/.my.key");
AuthenticationToken at = new AuthenticationToken(passwordFile);
</pre>

or alternatively:

<pre>
AuthenticationToken at = PasswordFileManager.CRYPTO.authFromFile("/home/john/.hidpass/.my.key");
</pre>

Authentication tokens are of high importance in ToxOtis, as they are necessary for most server-client data transactions.


h3. 2.3. Validate and Log out

The <em>local</em> status of a token can be retrieved using the method: <code>AuthenticationToken#getStatus()</code>. This checks whether the token has timed out. It is however more reliable to validate your token against an SSO server. For this purpose you should use the method <code>AuthenticationToken#validate() : boolean</code>. The method will return <code>true</code> if the token is valid and <code>false</code> otherwise.

<pre>
AuthenticationToken at = PasswordFileManager.CRYPTO.authFromFile("/home/john/.hidpass/.my.key");
boolean isValid = at.validate();
</pre>

If you need to discard your token so that it will not be active any more, you can invalidate it using the method <code>AuthenticationToken#invalidate()</code>.

<pre>
AuthenticationToken at = PasswordFileManager.CRYPTO.authFromFile("/home/john/.hidpass/.my.key");
// ... use your token ...
at.invalidate(); // Log out
boolean isValid = at.validate(); // isvalid is false
</pre>

h3. 2.4. Retrieve user information from a token

You can use a token to obtain information about the user that created it providing its username and password. These information will be returned as an instance of <a href="http://github.com/alphaville/ToxOtis/blob/master/src/org/opentox/toxotis/util/aa/User.java">User</a> "(doc)":http://opentox.ntua.gr/toxotis/javadoc/org/opentox/toxotis/util/aa/User.html. Here is an example:

<pre>
AuthenticationToken at = PasswordFileManager.CRYPTO.authFromFile("/home/john/.hidpass/.my.key");
User user = at.getUser();
System.out.println(user); 
</pre>

This will print:

<pre>
UID   : john
Name  : John Smith
Mail  : john@smith.org
Pass  : {SSHA}FZLdpBMyrOO8SCYU7TeQY1JWAleotAVi7482
</pre>

Users are suggested to invalidate their tokens if they don't need them anymore in other A&A sessions. What is more, if you need to create a new token, make sure you have invalidated your old one.


h3. 2.5. Managing your Tokens: Token Pool

Obtaining a new token each time authentication/authorization is required is not good practise both in terms of performance and security. ToxOtis comes with a "token management utility":http://github.com/alphaville/ToxOtis/blob/master/src/org/opentox/toxotis/util/aa/TokenPool.java "(doc)":http://opentox.ntua.gr/toxotis/javadoc/org/opentox/toxotis/util/aa/TokenPool.html that allows for multiple login of different users but restricts a single user from obtaining multiple tokens. Once a user logs in, its token is stored in the pool. In case he/she attepts to login again and the stored token has not expired, then no new token is obtained but the existing one is returned from the method. Here is an example:

<pre>
TokenPool tokenPool = TokenPool.getInstance();
for (int i =0; i < 10; i++){
   tokenPool.login("/path/to/my.key");
}
System.out.println(tokenPool.size());
</pre>

The method will output 1 and not 10!

h3. 2.6. Benchmarking

The following results are based on 30 successive measurements. The measurements were carried out on a Linux machine (2.6.31-22-generic kernel, x86_64 GNU/Linux) with 3.8GB of RAM and an Intel Core 2 Duo CPU P8700 @2.53GHz. The SDK ToxOtis was used to perform the measurements (version 0.4.2.23) which includes Weka version 3.6.2 (latest stable version) and Jena version 2.6.2. These libraries run on a Sun™ JVM, version 1.6.0.20 with Java™ SE Runtime Environment (build 1.6.0.20-b02). All measurements are in milliseconds (ms).

| average ping time for opensso.in-silico.ch | 57.9 (0% packet dropout) |
| Authentication using file | 131.96 |
| Average Invokation time for the method validate() in AuthenticationToken | 79.0 |
| Average Invokation time for the method invalidate() in AuthenticationToken | 72.1 |
| Average Invokation time for the method getUser() in AuthenticationToken | 154.4 |
| Authorization | 184.1 |


