h1. Factories

In this section we present the functionalities provided by the methods of the factory classes of ToxOtis that reside in the package <code>org.opentox.toxotis.factory</code>. They contain static methods that either create OTComponent objects or (for the sake of simplicity and performance) just return a URI or a collection of such. Note that for the same reason, these classes don't follow to the letter the "Factory Design Pattern":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Factory_method_pattern but in some cases return just pointers to the objects they create (i.e. in our case, their URLs/URIs). In the next sections we will go through each factory providing examples of use:

h2. 1. Overview

The package "org.opentox.toxotis.factory":http://opentox.ntua.gr/toxotis/javadoc/org/opentox/toxotis/factory/package-summary.html includes 3 factory classes:

* "CompoundFactory":http://github.com/alphaville/ToxOtis/blob/master/src/org/opentox/toxotis/factory/CompoundFactory.java "(doc)":http://opentox.ntua.gr/toxotis/javadoc/org/opentox/toxotis/factory/CompoundFactory.html : Provides methods for publishing compounds using local representations from a file (e.g. SDF).
* "DatasetFactory":http://github.com/alphaville/ToxOtis/blob/master/src/org/opentox/toxotis/factory/DatasetFactory.java "(doc)":http://opentox.ntua.gr/toxotis/javadoc/org/opentox/toxotis/factory/DatasetFactory.html : Provides methods for creating a Dataset object using weka objects (Instance, Instances) or ARFF files.
* "FeatureFactory":http://github.com/alphaville/ToxOtis/blob/master/src/org/opentox/toxotis/factory/FeatureFactory.java "(doc)":http://opentox.ntua.gr/toxotis/javadoc/org/opentox/toxotis/factory/FeatureFactory.html : Provides remote database lookup methods

h2. 2. Examples

h3. 2.1. FeatureFactory

h4. 2.1.1. List all features stored in a remote feature service

The method <code>listAllFeatures</code> in FeatureFactory returns all features stored in a specified remote feature service. The method returns a list of "URIs":http://github.com/alphaville/ToxOtis/blob/master/src/org/opentox/toxotis/client/VRI.java "(doc)":http://opentox.ntua.gr/toxotis/javadoc/org/opentox/toxotis/client/VRI.html of the features. Users can subsequently use there URIs to download and parse some of these features if necessary. The maximum number of returned URIs can be prespecified to avoid huge lists of URIs. Here is a simple example:

<pre>
Set<VRI> featureUris = FeatureFactory.listAllFeatures(Services.ambitUniPlovdiv().augment("feature"), 10, null);
</pre>

The above method will return a list of a maximum length equal to 10. If one needs all features, it suffices to set the <code>max</code> parameter to <code>-1</code>, that is:

<pre>
Set<VRI> allFeatureUris = FeatureFactory.listAllFeatures(Services.ambitUniPlovdiv().augment("feature"), -1, null);
</pre>

If paging is supported by the remote service, then you can specify the page length and page index while getting the list of features:

<pre>
Set<VRI> featureUris = FeatureFactory.listAllFeatures(Services.ambitUniPlovdiv().augment("feature"), 3, 10, null);
</pre>

The above code means that you request for the 3rd page of length 10. Here is a possible list of features:

<pre>
http://apps.ideaconsult.net:8080/ambit2/feature/20089
http://apps.ideaconsult.net:8080/ambit2/feature/20088
http://apps.ideaconsult.net:8080/ambit2/feature/20087
http://apps.ideaconsult.net:8080/ambit2/feature/20086
http://apps.ideaconsult.net:8080/ambit2/feature/20085
http://apps.ideaconsult.net:8080/ambit2/feature/20084
http://apps.ideaconsult.net:8080/ambit2/feature/20091
http://apps.ideaconsult.net:8080/ambit2/feature/20090
http://apps.ideaconsult.net:8080/ambit2/feature/20093
http://apps.ideaconsult.net:8080/ambit2/feature/20092
</pre>


h4. 2.1.2. Search for a feature using the OT feature ontology based on the ECHA specifications (namespace: http://www.opentox.org/echaEndpoints.owl#). 

You can perform a database lookup on a remote feature service providing your search criteria in a very convenient way. For example, say you need to get a list of all features that are <em>sameAs</em> the dissociation constant pKa (otee:Dissociation_constant_pKa). Then using the method <code>lookupSameAs</code>, one has:

<pre>
Set<VRI> features = FeatureFactory.lookupSameAs(OTEchaEndpoints.DissociationConstantPKa(), null);
for (VRI f : features) {
    System.out.println(f.toString());
}
</pre>

A list of all ECHA endpoints is provided from "OTEchaEndpoints":http://github.com/alphaville/ToxOtis/blob/master/src/org/opentox/toxotis/ontology/collection/OTEchaEndpoints.java "(doc)":http://opentox.ntua.gr/toxotis/javadoc/org/opentox/toxotis/ontology/collection/OTEchaEndpoints.html and a collection of some common features is available through "OTFeatures":http://github.com/alphaville/ToxOtis/blob/master/src/org/opentox/toxotis/ontology/collection/OTFeatures.java "(doc)":http://opentox.ntua.gr/toxotis/javadoc/org/opentox/toxotis/ontology/collection/OTFeatures.html .

This factory allows also for new features to be easily created and POSTed to a feature service for publication in a single line of code. Proper authentication/authorization are required most of the times. The invokation of the corresponding method is especially useful when developing model training web services where a prediction feature needs to be created for the model. Here is an example:

<pre>
Model m = ...;
Feature predictedFeature = FeatureFactory.createAndPublishFeature(
                    "Feature created as prediction feature for the RBF NN model "+m.getUri(),
                    new ResourceValue(m.getUri(), OTClasses.Model()), featureService, token);
</pre>


h3. 2.2. DatasetFactory

"DatasetFactory":https://github.com/alphaville/ToxOtis/blob/master/src/org/opentox/toxotis/factory/DatasetFactory.java "(doc)":http://opentox.ntua.gr/toxotis/javadoc/org/opentox/toxotis/factory/DatasetFactory.html is a class with static methods that facilitates dataset creation and conversion from ARFF files and weka.core.Instances objects into Datasets. Using as a source a File, an InputStream, a Reader or an Instances object, a new Dataset can be created. More, there is a method to create a single DataEntry instance out of a weka.core.Instance object. Here we will provide two examples that users might stubmle across their development. First, the ordinary case of reading from a "file":http://download.oracle.com/javase/1.5.0/docs/api/java/io/File.html :

<pre>
String filePath = "/path/to/your_file.arff"; // << You path here!
java.io.File file = new java.io.File(filePath);
Dataset myDataset = DatasetFactory.createFromArff(file);
</pre>

The above source code will generate a Dataset out of the given "ARFF file":http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/~ml/weka/arff.html or will throw a ToxOtisException in case the ARFF file you provided is not compliant with the ToxOtis requirements. For more details, please read the ToxOtis Documentation about "weka":https://github.com/alphaville/ToxOtis/blob/master/doc/Doc_03_Weka.textile

The second use case concerns the creation of a Dataset object out of an online resource where the ARFF file is available with content negotiation when the client specifies the Header 'Accept: text/x-arff'. Here is an example:

<pre>
Dataset myDataset = null;
IGetClient client = ClientFactory.createGetClient(null);
client.setMediaType(Media.WEKA_ARFF);
try {
    int code = client.getResponseCode();
    if (code == 200) {
        InputStream stream = client.getRemoteStream();
        myDataset =DatasetFactory.createFromArff(stream);
    } else {
        // Handle Exceptional Event
    }
} catch (IOException ex) {
    // Handle Exceptional Event
} finally {
    try {
        client.close();
    } catch (IOException ex) {
        // Cannot close client...
    }
}
</pre>



h2. 3. References

# "ARFF files":http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/~ml/weka/arff.html
# "OpenTox API version 1.2":http://opentox.org/dev/apis/api-1.2
# "Factory method pattern":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Factory_method_pattern. Article on Wikipedia.
